feat(kube-stack): add presets.prometheus.{nodeExporter,cadvisor,podAnnotations} (#2206)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-helm-charts: charts/opentelemetry-kube-stack/README.md

> [!NOTE]
> This chart aims to provide compatibility for scrape targets from the kube-prometheus-stack chart. This chart is not responsible for applying Prometheus Rules, Alertmanager, or a Prometheus instance.

#### `presets.prometheus.*` vs. kube-prometheus-stack ServiceMonitors

> The `presets.prometheus.*` family (`nodeExporter`, `cadvisor`, `podAnnotations`) adds named instances of the prometheus receiver to the daemonset collector's metrics pipeline. They are a DaemonSet-local alternative to the kube-prometheus-stack (KPS) `ServiceMonitor`-based approach and a **replacement** for the `daemon_scrape_configs.yaml` scrape file. The two approaches produce **similar but not identical** time series.

Reviewer: Why are we mentioning service monitors here? We're only replacing the need for the daemon_scrape_configs.yaml no? IMO there are many users who will want want to use the presets you're adding _and_ service monitors which are a very standard prometheus pattern.

Author: Section removed. I just keep a reference to ServiceMonitor for the nodeExporter in the section "risk of duplicates"

> ##### Constraints (chart-enforced)

Reviewer: can we put all of this new content below into a dropdown? Or at least we should put this in the issue/PR description and remove it from here, this is quite verbose.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. The details are now hidden by default using collapsable sections.

For OTel-aware backends, any missing Kubernetes context is supplied downstream by the `k8sattributes` processor (`presets.kubernetesAttributes.enabled`) as resource attributes rather than Prometheus labels.

###### Why `nodeExporter` emits fewer labels

node-exporter metrics are **host-scoped** — `node_cpu_seconds_total` describes the kernel of the underlying node, not any specific pod. When kube-prometheus-stack scrapes node-exporter via Endpoints SD, it attaches `namespace`/`pod`/`container` labels that describe the *exporter's own deployment* (`monitoring/prometheus-node-exporter-xyz/node-exporter`). Those labels carry no information about the metric and are easy to misuse (e.g. `sum by (namespace) (node_cpu_seconds_total)` returns one number for whichever namespace node-exporter is deployed in, not per-workload usage).

The `nodeExporter` preset drops them deliberately; this is a feature, not a parity gap. `cadvisor` and `podAnnotations` series, by contrast, *are* per-workload and so emit `namespace`/`pod`/`container` meaningfully.

##### Backward compatibility with `daemon_scrape_configs.yaml`

> Each preset replaces a specific scrape job in `daemon_scrape_configs.yaml`. All three are drop-in compatible — `job` / `instance` / Kubernetes label set are preserved, so existing queries, dashboards, alerts, and recording rules keep working. The remaining differences are either additive (a new `node` label) or default-value tweaks called out per preset below.

Reviewer: Unless we provide a rewrite path with a transform processor this is decidedly NOT backwards compatible.

###### `nodeExporter` ↔ `node-exporter` job

> **Drop-in compatible.** Same scrape target (`${OTEL_K8S_NODE_IP}:9100`), same `job=node-exporter` label, same `scrape_interval: 30s`. The preset additionally emits a `node` label (the legacy job didn't) — purely additive, won't break queries.

Reviewer: this will objectively break queries as the label _is_ changing no?

##### Customization

KPS exposes `relabelings` and `metricRelabelings` on each `ServiceMonitor`. The presets expose `enabled`, `scrapeInterval`, `scrapeTimeout`, and — for `nodeExporter` / `cadvisor` only — `port`. (`podAnnotations` discovers the port per pod from the `prometheus.io/port` annotation, so a chart-level `port` knob doesn't apply.) For richer relabeling, drop the preset and use `scrape_configs_file` instead — see [scrape_configs_file Details](#scrape_configs_file-details).

##### Other duplicate-scrape risks

* **`prometheus-node-exporter` subchart**: when installed via the top-level `nodeExporter.enabled: true` flag, the subchart creates its own `ServiceMonitor` by default. If a target allocator picks it up, node-exporter is scraped twice — once locally by every daemonset collector and once via the ServiceMonitor through the cluster collector.

##### When to use which

* **Use the presets** if you want a sharded, DaemonSet-native pipeline with no central Prometheus bottleneck and your dashboards rely primarily on `job` / `instance` / `node` (and, for `podAnnotations`, the standard Kubernetes label set).

> * **Use the target allocator + ServiceMonitors** (set `targetAllocator.enabled: true` instead) if you need full KPS label parity (including `service` / `endpoint` / `container`), want CRD-driven dynamic configuration, or are porting existing KPS dashboards/recording rules unchanged.

Reviewer: There are users who will be doing both, and the presets are not set to be mutually exclusive so this inclusion is incorrect and will confuse users.

Author: Section removed, I just kept "Duplicate-scrape risks" that mentions challenges when mixing the scrappings.

> [!NOTE]
> This chart aims to provide compatibility for scrape targets from the kube-prometheus-stack chart. This chart is not responsible for applying Prometheus Rules, Alertmanager, or a Prometheus instance.

#### `presets.prometheus.*` presets

The `presets.prometheus.*` family (`nodeExporter`, `cadvisor`, `podAnnotations`) configure the OpenTelemetry Collectors to scrape popular Prometheus Kubernetes metrics:

* `presets.prometheus.nodeExporter`: Kubernetes node metrics exposed with the [prometheus-node-exporter](https://github.com/prometheus-community/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/prometheus-node-exporter),

> * `presets.prometheus.cadvisor`: [cAdvisor](https://github.com/google/cadvisor) metrics exposed with the [Kube State Metrics](https://github.com/prometheus-community/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/kube-state-metrics) (aka KSM)

Reviewer 2: What does it mean for cadvisor metrics to be "exposed with the KSM"?

Author: ```suggestion
* `presets.prometheus.cadvisor`: [cAdvisor](https://github.com/google/cadvisor) metrics exposed with the [Prometheus Kube State Metrics Helm Chart](https://github.com/prometheus-community/helm-charts/tree/main/charts/kube-state-metrics) (aka KSM Helm Chart) 
```

@dashpole To clarify, I was referring to the Prometheus Community's KSM Helm Chart, which is the setup I tested against. Does my proposed change make more sense in that context?

Reviewer 2: Why would we need to use the KSM chart for cAdvisor metrics?

Author: I'm not deeply familiar with this area 👼  I was mostly following the pattern used by the OTel Kube Stack Helm Chart here:

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-helm-charts/blob/c7dc0383503231e8001cdc6d4f5a2d0a6e3b0853/charts/opentelemetry-kube-stack/Chart.yaml#L31-L34

Reviewer 2: I took a deeper look.  You aren't actually using KSM in any capacity from what I can tell, so I would just say something like "cAdvisor metrics scraped from the kubelet".

Author: ```suggestion
* `presets.prometheus.cadvisor`: [cAdvisor](https://github.com/google/cadvisor) metrics scraped from the kubelet,
```

Thank you so much for your thorough review!

bridge.image.tag: 0.103.0
```

> ### scrape_configs_file Details

Author: FYI section moved above, next to "`presets.prometheus.*` presets"
